for Mrs. Kimball's cultural geography class. I'm
interviewing Sam Lampo in Bryan College Station.
This is Sam J. Lampo. I live at 601 Gordon Street.
And I live with my son-in-law since my wife passed
away. And I was born in 1900.
And when I was two years old, we moved to a location
on Dilley-Chartef. My father bought the land,
bought 107 acres of land and paid $10 an acre. We
struggled to pay for it, but in about three years,
we got it paid for. And from then on, of course, I
went to part-time school, stayed with my parents.
and if I could, when I'd go to school. We went to an
old country school, which we used to call Mount
Prayer. Well, my land was transferred to another
school, which was Prospect. And the reason it was
transferred was, we were going to Prospect, but
Mount Prayer before was because there was a big
creek, and every time it would rain, Well, I had to
spend the night with somebody because I couldn't
get home on account of high waters. So anyway, they
transferred our land back to Prospect
and went there until I was about 17 years old. In
fact, I went up to the seventh grade.
Went to Dallas, stayed about a month or two, worked
with my sister and her husband. They had a little
store, and I helped them in the store. But in 1920, I
married my wife, Lena ,, who we had two kids. We had a
daughter in 1922 and a daughter, a son in 1925, who
was Josephine . Lampo Ruffino and my son, Johnny
Lampo, runs the... runs the bakery, farmer's
bakery here. Farmer's bakery and a kolache shop.
Well, we go back a little further. My daddy came to
this country in 1984, in 1884.
He stayed in Louisiana about three years. Three of
my brothers and sisters were born in Louisiana,
and then they moved to Texas. And they
crop-shared, farmed for a few years around until
in 1902 then, we bought, like I said, we bought 300
acres of land. So... I was married three years and
making a crop for myself. I moved to Bryan, to the
city of Bryan, and was, by the way, I was born just
two and a half miles from the city limit of Bryan.
And I moved to Bryan and went to work for Lawrence
Grocery Company, that $12 a week. And I worked for
$12 a week for a period of about four or five years.
And eventually I got a big raise. They raised me to
$15. It was a time at that time that depression was
coming.
By that time, I was saving a little money out of that
$12 a week on a raise of $15 because I spent it. and
didn't save any. But time passed by, and my two kids
were born, like I say, one in 1922 and one in 1925.
From
then on, I worked for Lawrence Grocery Company,
and later on I became a shipping clerk. And then
later on I
became assistant manager and then manager of
Lawrence Gross Company for a few years. And
finally Lawrence Gross Company sold out to
Kimball and I went to back work for Kimball.
Well, after working for Kimball about a year and a
half, I've always wanted to go into the retail
business and I had accumulated a few dollars by
that time. Time got good after Roosevelt was
elected and things began to get better. And I
bought Charlie Ball's store on 25th Street in
Bryan. And we stayed there for nine years and had
good business. As we were doing the Korean War, the
Bryan Air Base was opened and we got a lot of
business from the boys at Bryan Field. somebody
that may know what Bryan Field is, a blind training
school, one of the first, I think, that was built.
And they had quite a few soldiers there and a little
air corps, really. And a lot of people from Bryan
worked there. But as time went on,
we finally, in 1949, we thought that we'd We had
enough of the grocery business. And so we stayed
home. We sold out. And I actually retired. And that
was in 1958.
So after being retired about a year and a half, I was
beginning to lose strength. I didn't do anything
but watch TV, and I decided I better go back to go to
work and get a little exercise and nothing else.
And I went to work for Barney Morrow, who had a
meatpacking and killing plan. I just answered the
telephone, and I take orders. Finally got out of
it, and it was the sale of my family. From then on,
about a year, I imagine, And then my son Johnny
bought the Easyway Drive-In, which is on 2612
Texas Avenue. Now it's still the Easyway
Drive-In, but in the meantime, we sold it to the
U-Totem, and the lease was over. They didn't renew
the lease, so we had to take it back. And my two
grandkids, Johnny Lampo and Frankie Lampo are on
it now, and they are operating. And, of course,
it's a fabulous business. In the meantime, my son
had opened it, had built the building right next
door to the drive-in, and built a place for the fish
and chips. And they stayed about a couple of years.
And of course, they went broke. And we had to take
the building. And we made a bakery shop out of it,
which is, we call it now, the Farmer's Bakery. The
Farmer's Bakery Shop, Kolache Inn. And this is
what we've done at the present time. When we opened
up the bakery shop, I worked, just helped them for a
while, for about a year, and then retired again. So
I'm still retired.
You mentioned that you had gone to school in a
one-room schoolhouse. That's right. What
exactly was that like? Well, it was just one-room
school. It taught all grades. And we had one
teacher who was a lady. Her name was Mrs. Lloyd. She
was Mrs. Lloyd Smith at that time. And now she would
have passed away a few years ago. And that one-room
school, it was so bad that we never hardly used the
door. We went out through the windows and through
the walls. And in other words, it was just, it
wasn't really a school. It was just a barn. But we
learned a little bit. And like I say that later
after that, we moved to, they transferred us back
to gospel school. And they went... They went to the
seventh grade. After the transfer, they
transferred our land to the prospect school. I
went there two years. And of course, like I say, I
graduated from there. And it was a one-room, it was
a one-room school. And they finally made a
three-room school out of it. They added a couple of
rooms. And it was a lot nicer school, a new school.
And we had two teachers.
We
got quite a bit of experience and education out of
it. Like I said, we wanted to go from there. We moved
to Dallas and stayed a while and come back to Bryan
and married. What did you want to be when you were
growing up? I didn't know. I didn't have any idea
where to go except that I wanted to get out of the
farm because there wasn't too much in it at the
time. We had sort of kind of a depression on and off
there. But this particular time, the best crop I
ever made was in 1923 and it was the last. So I sold
out everything I had. I had two mules and a horse and
four or five cows and all plowed too. You needed
them big. You could buy them all for $100 probably
now. It takes $50,000 to start a farm now. It's a lot
different. But no such thing as a tractor. We did
have a riding planter to plant that cotton with.
But that's about as far as mechanical that we got as
a riding planter. Was cotton the main crop? Cotton
was the main crop, yeah. We raised a little corn,
but not very much. What happened when you moved to
Dallas, when you moved off the farm? When I moved to
Dallas, I stayed with my sister and helped him in
the store. And my brother-in-law decided they'd
move to California. And then I came on back home. By
that time, I was about 19 or 20 years old. On the 31st
day of October, I married my wife. That was October
in 1920. And we lived a happy life until 1965. She
passed away. Since then, I've been living with my
daughter. What did you think of, was Dallas a big
city? Dallas was a big city then, yes. At that time,
we probably had five or six thousand people in
Bryan, maybe seven. And of course Dallas probably
had a couple hundred thousand. Did you like it? No,
I never was too much for city life. I used an open
country to hunt rabbits, and actually that, for a
long time, rabbits was our meat, wildlife was our
meat, because we weren't able to buy it. Of course
in the holidays, We would buy meat during the whole
getting time. We'd kill a hog and make a lard and put
up bacon and sausage. And the only thing that we had
to buy was coffee and sugar and stuff that we
couldn't raise. We had chickens and turkeys and
all kinds of eggs we needed. What was the trip like
going from here to Dallas? Well, I went on a train. I
enjoyed that. I still would enjoy a train ride now.
I was hoping that they'd put the soundtrack
through here. During the time that they had the
railroad after my wife and I were married, I made a
million trips to Dallas. I have a brother. I still
have a brother there. And he lost his wife also, by
the way, within six months of my wife. And he stayed
with his daughter. And I go to that business now
once in a while, but I go on the bus. It's not like
riding that Sunday. So I
don't know too much of any experience that I might
have had.
Have you ever been to Italy to see your father's
parents? No, I'm one of the few guys, I believe,
that in my younger days, I wanted to travel, but I
never was able. When I finally got able to travel,
my health kind of broke down. And I didn't want to
get too far away from home. But I never did have any
desire of going back to Italy or any foreign
country. I have never set foot outside of the
United States, never. I've taken a few trips to
California.
But I haven't. We went to Memphis, Tennessee one
time when my brother-in-law moved. And between
this time, he moved to Memphis, Tennessee. At that
time, Memphis had 17 lumber mills that made
different things. And we thought that my brother
would have two grown brothers. They could easily
get a job there, so we all We got our clothes and
moved to Memphis. We left in October, and it was
warm here. We left, of course, in our comfortable
clothes. But we had all our winter stuff, like
quilts and blankets and stuff like that, packed in
a truck. And we shipped those by rail, by railroad.
Well, when we got off the train, there was about a
foot's of snow in the streets of Memphis. And boy,
you talk about trees, and they're not frozen. And
it took us a month before we got our trunks closed,
or I want to close them. And at that time, I don't
know whether many people remember the first gas I
ever saw. This is like Lone Star gas here. The first
gas I ever saw was in Memphis. And we had to put a
quarter in the meter. according to two quarters or
three quarters or four quarters. And it would burn
as long as that quarter lasted. And when you run
out, you're in the middle of a cooking meal, and you
didn't have a quarter, you was out of luck. So it was
quite an experience. We stayed there about a
month. And one of the experiences I had in Memphis
during Christmas At my age, say at that time I was
around 12 years old, I had the measles. And all I
could do was look through the window and watch the
streetcar come by. And we stayed there 30 days and
moved to Dallas. When we moved to Dallas, we bought
a grocery store. Well, my two bold brothers came
from the country, you know, and they saw them
pretty girls in Dallas. Well, they went kind of a
little blind, you know. And they left me and my
father. to run the store. Well, he was well up in age
by then. And I went to school sometime in Dallas,
too. And we didn't stay that long enough to move.
But we were good. And to be frank with you, we were
losing money every day. And we just sold out. We had
a fellow that won't buy it, and we sold it out before
we went broke. But my mother was a thrifty woman.
She always kept money away from us. All of us. We
didn't know what she had. And when we moved back in
Bryan, we were my father and the rest of the family
were worried how we were going to fight. Our team
back didn't know if we started farming. In the
meantime, we had rented our land for one year to one
of the neighbors. He was working there. And he made
39 bales of cotton out here while we were in Dallas.
And we lost that. And we had to come in and We were
just wondering where we were going to get the money
to buy the team back and the wagon and everything.
My mother said, Joe, buy the mill. I'll furnish the
money. She had $4,000. No one knew she had. She had
saved all these years. While we was still out in the
country at home, we bought some property in town.
Of course, we... I had that paid for when my daddy
passed away in 1929. And my mother passed away in
1945. And they left us with a start to some of the
inheritance that I had when I bought the store.
What was Brian like when you came back? Brian was,
before I moved to Brian, I mean, into the city of
Bryan. The streets were just as muddy as you've
ever seen in your life. We sold people out in the
country. And they had boardwalks made out of
two-by-twelve to walk across the street, no
sidewalks or nothing. It was a rough deal for
a while. And while I was working for Lawrence Roach
Company, we had all these big farmers that they
would hitch six mules to one wagon, maybe once a
month. They had commissaries out in the farm. And
we would load 2,000 pounds different items on each
wagon. They'd come in six wagons, four, eight.
We'd put 2,000 pounds, 20,000, 20 bags of beans,
100 pounds, 20 sacks of potatoes. In other words,
2,000 pounds to the load. And they'd do that about
once a year. We had no, we had one little truck when I
went to work, when I first came. A little T-model
Ford that you had to hand crank. And that was the
pain when the thing was hard to start. Well,
anyway, it wasn't long. It wasn't too long before
we got better trucks, and we went on. And we were
well financed when we sold out there. The main man
that had 51% of the stock, he thought everything
would come through. And he decided to sell it to
Kimball. and left a bunch of us without a job. At
that time, I was a salesman. When the Depression
came, I lost my manager's job.
I went to sell it. I took the salesman's job. They
let about seven or eight boys go. But I stayed gone
one week. They called me back. They had too many
going, and I had to go to work on just common labor.
Went back to $12 a week. And from then on, of course,
we arrived at $15 to $25. Then NRA come in, if you
remember that right. You know, you don't
remember, but you might have read about it. Roy
Lavelle come in. He closed the bank before he got to
his office in order to close all the banks. And we
never... Would it disturb you all to share all your
books? We'll be through in just a little bit. We'll
be through in just a little
bit. The NRA. The NRA come in and they had to raise my
salary.
We made pretty good money, and then it went on up, on
up, started going up
then. About 1940,
then World War II broke out. You never had any
desires to join the military? I wasn't old enough.
See, in 1942, I was on the,
when the war broke out, I wasn't 18 yet. But in
November, not in November, but the end of World War
II, I just had registered. Wait a minute, let me get
that straight. In World War I, I just had
registered. And in August, and on the 11th, the
armistice was signed, and they never did call me.
And then when World War II comes, I was too old. I was
42 years old. I don't think anybody over 35.
So I missed both wars, and I regret it now, but I was
glad then. I don't know. There's a lot of little
things that happened to me during all this time.
It's hard to just think about them all at one time. I
had them. I'll tell you this, though, that's what
had happened in my family. I had a sister who was
born in Italy. She was the only one that was born in
Italy, and the rest of us were all born here. And she
married a widow with four kids. I think it was five
kids. And she had five of her own. And one day, she
stroked off to the... lake that for some reason or
another one of the kids flipped in the air in this
lake and she tried to save him and either one of them
could swim. I lost five
nephews and nieces and she died also. She was
drowned also. That was one of the greatest
experiences of my life. A sad experience. It's one
of the tragedies in the family. And I had a little
brother who was five years older than I that got
killed by a mule and kicked him on the side. But I
didn't go to the doctor until he was dead. He had to
drive,
take it two hours to get to town probably. So that's
one of the sad experiences for me. Did you have any
brothers that were in the military that were older
than you? Yes, I had a brother. My oldest brother
still living. He's 87 years old now.
He wasn't married, and he was about 31 years old or
something like that when he went to the service.
Then in the morning of the armistice, they had
orders to go up to the front line. Before they got to
the front line, with arms assigned, and he never
hit the fire. I didn't get the fire shot. So he was
pretty lucky then. And it had hit him at service. He
was there about 11 months.
He was almost nine and a half years old. And the
other one is out and has a cataract in him. But he
gets along pretty good. But he's 87 years old.
That's quite a few years, too, you know. What did
you think of California? Well, I didn't go to
California really for a good time. I went mostly to
visit my sister. And she had two boys and a
daughter. And we just had a wonderful time. We
didn't go to any soap opera shows and stuff like
that. We had tickets to go to have a show. I believe
they called it Breakfast at Sardi or something
like that. I don't remember who it was. James, I
believe,
was my commentary. And we had tickets to go the next
Monday morning, but I had to leave that Sunday
because I had to be able to work the next Monday
morning. It was the first time I ever got on a plane,
a four-motor plane. The
second time I went, we went in three, at least to
call them, Astro Jet. We had three motors, one on
the tail and one on each wing. We left Dallas at 10
o'clock and we arrived
in Dallas at... Ten on five. Oh, the time change.
The time change, two hours. We got that in two hours
and five minutes. And now, of course, they go
faster than that now. I mean, that was a little bit
too fast, but you could tell it once you get where
you can
tell it. I'd like to tell you a little bit about my
father's life. that he told us a lot about because I
wasn't even born. But he was born in 1852. And of
course, in Italy, they had compulsory military
service then. They always had it. And when he was
21, he had to go into service. And his father was
dead. His mother was living. And he had a friend of
his. He didn't even know how to read and write. He
had a friend of his that used to write the letters
for him, write to his mother. So he told him one day,
he said, John, if you want to write your mother from
here on out, you'll have to do it yourself, because
as long as I write for you, you'll never learn to
read and write. He knew the vowels and the
alphabets, you know. Of course, Italian language
is, you read it. You read it like it's written. You
don't have these silent letters in that. Anyway,
he learned to read and write. And he belonged to an
infantry.
And they would go on the movers. And they'd have
these shooting matches. And my daddy got out of the
Army six months ahead of time. because he was a
sharpshooter. And his company, as long as he was in
the Army, won the first prize. And the major who was
in charge of the company got to like him.